1. Handling Concurrent Booking Requests in Node.js to Prevent Double Bookings
Concurrency issues in event booking systems arise when multiple users attempt to book the same event at the same time. To handle this and prevent double bookings, we need to ensure that only one booking is processed for an event at a time. This requires both application-level and database-level strategies to ensure data consistency.

Application-Level Strategy:
At the application level, a few approaches can be implemented:

a. Locking Mechanisms:
we can use a mutex (mutual exclusion) lock to ensure that only one request is processed at a time for the same event. This will block concurrent requests for the same event until the current booking is completed.

we can use a Redis-based distributed lock mechanism (e.g., redlock package) to create locks for each event. Redis works well here due to its fast performance and ability to handle distributed environments.
bash
npm install redlock ioredis

b. Optimistic Concurrency Control (OCC):
With optimistic concurrency, no locks are used, but the application checks a version of the event before processing. If the event data has been modified since it was read (indicating another booking), the booking is aborted, and the user is asked to retry.
This is usually implemented using a versioning field in the database (e.g., a version column or updatedAt timestamp). The application will read the event data, check the version, and then update the event only if the version matches what was read.

2. Database-Level Strategy:
To ensure consistency at the database level, you can use the following strategies:

a. Database Transactions:
Using database transactions ensures that multiple steps in the booking process (e.g., checking available slots and creating a booking) are executed atomically. If any step fails, the transaction is rolled back, preventing double booking.

In PostgreSQL, for example:
sql
BEGIN;

SELECT * FROM events WHERE event_id = 1 AND available_slots > 0 FOR UPDATE;
UPDATE events SET available_slots = available_slots - 1 WHERE event_id = 1;
INSERT INTO bookings (user_id, event_id, booked_at) VALUES (123, 1, NOW());
COMMIT;

This approach ensures that when multiple users attempt to book the same event, the FOR UPDATE lock will prevent other transactions from reading the same event until the current booking completes.

b. Unique Constraint in the Database:
A unique constraint can be added to prevent duplicate bookings by the same user for the same event. This would be enforced at the database schema level.

3. Combined Application and Database Strategy
To fully handle concurrency and prevent double booking:

Application Layer: Use Redis-based locks (mutex) or optimistic concurrency control to ensure only one request for a given event is processed at a time.
Database Layer: Use transactions with SELECT FOR UPDATE to lock rows and ensure atomic booking operations. Additionally, add a unique constraint to prevent duplicate bookings.